Strategies for Qualitative Interviews
A Few General Points
 Stop and Think: should interviews be included in your research design?
o Are there alternative ways of answering your research question through
documentary review, observation or unobtrusive measures?
o Be clear about the possible biases and limitations of interviews
 The point of a qualitative interview is to let the respondent tell their own story on their own terms.
 THIS IS NOT A SURVEY! The guide acts as a prompt, reminding you of necessary topics to cover, questions to ask and areas to probe. As such, it should be simple so that your primary focus can stay on the respondent. It’s best to memorize your guide!
 How much time will you spend with each respondent? Adjust your guide accordingly (it may take several interviews to judge the correct length).
 Try out a new guide (or parts of it) on friends and get their feedback before using it in the field.
Should you record and transcribe interviews?
PROS:
 It helps to correct the natural limitations of our memories and of the intuitive glosses that
we might place on what people say in interviews
 It allows more thorough examination of what people say
 It permits repeated examinations of the interviewees’ answers
 It opens up the data to public scrutiny by other researchers, who can evaluate the analysis
that is carried out by the original researchers of the data (that is, a secondary analysis)
 It therefore helps to counter accusations that an analysis might have been influenced by a
researcher’s values or biases
 It allows the data to be reused in other ways from those intended by the original
researcher—for example, in the light of new theoretical ideas or analytic strategies.
CONS:
 It introduces a different dynamic into the social encounter of the interview, and recording
equipment may be off-putting for interviewees.
 Transcribing is a very time-consuming process. It also requires good equipment, usually in
the form of a good-quality tape recorder and microphone but also, if possible, a transcription machine. Transcription also very quickly results in a daunting pile of paper.
   
 A Successful Interviewer is:
1. Knowledgeable: is thoroughly familiar with the focus of the interview; pilot interviews of the kind used in survey interviewing can be useful here.
2. Structuring: gives purpose for interview; rounds it off; asks whether interviewee has questions.
3. Clear: asks simple, easy, short questions; no jargon.
4. Gentle: lets people finish; gives them time to think; tolerates pauses.
5. Sensitive: listens attentively to what is said and how it is said; is empathetic in dealing with
the interviewee.
6. Open: responds to what is important to interviewee and is flexible.
7. Steering: knows what he/she wants to find out.
8. Critical: is prepared to challenge what is said, for example, dealing with inconsistencies in
interviewees’ replies.
9. Remembering: relates what is said to what has previously been said.
10. Interpreting: clarifies and extends meanings of interviewees’ statements, but without
imposing meaning on them.
11. Balanced: does not talk too much, which may make the interviewee passive, and does not
talk too little, which may result in the interviewee feeling he or she is not talking along the
right lines.
12. Ethically sensitive: is sensitive to the ethical dimension of interviewing, ensuring the
interviewee appreciates what the research is about, its purposes, and that his or her answers will be treated confidentially.